ANTIPHOLUS
Fear me not, man; I will not break away:
I'll give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
To warrant thee, as I am 'rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
And will not lightly trust the messenger
That I should be attach'd in Ephesus,
I tell you, 'twill sound harshly in her ears.
Here comes my man; I think he brings the money.
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?
Here's that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
ANTIPHOLUS
But where's the money?
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
ANTIPHOLUS
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
I'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
ANTIPHOLUS
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
To a rope's-end, sir; and to that end am I returned.
ANTIPHOLUS
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
Good sir, be patient.
Nay, 'tis for me to be patient; I am in adversity.
Good, now, hold thy tongue.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou whoreson, senseless villain!
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
your blows.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
ass.
I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long
ears. I have served him from the hour of my
nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he
heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me
with beating; I am waked with it when I sleep;
raised with it when I sit; driven out of doors with
it when I go from home; welcomed home with it when
I return; nay, I bear it on my shoulders, as a
beggar wont her brat; and, I think when he hath
lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.
Mistress, 'respice finem,' respect your end; or
rather, the prophecy like the parrot, 'beware the
rope's-end.'
ANTIPHOLUS
Wilt thou still talk?
How say you now? is not your husband mad?
His incivility confirms no less.
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy!
Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.
ANTIPHOLUS
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight:
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven!
ANTIPHOLUS
Peace, doting wizard, peace! I am not mad.
O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!
ANTIPHOLUS
You minion, you, are these your customers?
Did this companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
And I denied to enter in my house?
O husband, God doth know you dined at home;
Where would you had remain'd until this time,
Free from these slanders and this open shame!
ANTIPHOLUS
Dined at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
ANTIPHOLUS
Were not my doors lock'd up and I shut out?
Perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut out.
ANTIPHOLUS
And did not she herself revile me there?
Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
ANTIPHOLUS
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Certes, she did; the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.
ANTIPHOLUS
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
In verity you did; my bones bear witness,
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
Is't good to soothe him in these contraries?
It is no shame: the fellow finds his vein,
And yielding to him humours well his frenzy.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou hast suborn'd the goldsmith to arrest me.
Alas, I sent you money to redeem you,
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
Money by me! heart and goodwill you might;
But surely master, not a rag of money.
ANTIPHOLUS
Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
He came to me and I deliver'd it.
And I am witness with her that she did.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
That I was sent for nothing but a rope!
Mistress, both man and master is possess'd;
I know it by their pale and deadly looks:
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
ANTIPHOLUS
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
And, gentle master, I received no gold;
But I confess, sir, that we were lock'd out.
Dissembling villain, thou speak'st false in both.
ANTIPHOLUS
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all;
And art confederate with a damned pack
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
But with these nails I'll pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
O, bind him, bind him! let him not come near me.
More company! The fiend is strong within him.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
ANTIPHOLUS
What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
I am thy prisoner: wilt thou suffer them
To make a rescue?
Masters, let him go
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
He is my prisoner: if I let him go,
The debt he owes will be required of me.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee:
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Good master doctor, see him safe convey'd
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!
ANTIPHOLUS
O most unhappy strumpet!
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?
Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master:
cry 'The devil!'
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?
One Angelo, a goldsmith: do you know him?
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
Two hundred ducats.
Say, how grows it due?
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
When as your husband all in rage to-day
Came to my house and took away my ring--
The ring I saw upon his finger now--
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is:
I long to know the truth hereof at large.
God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.
And come with naked swords.
Let's call more help to have them bound again.
Away! they'll kill us.
ANTIPHOLUS
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come to the Centaur; fetch our stuff from thence:
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Faith, stay here this night; they will surely do us
no harm: you saw they speak us fair, give us gold:
methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
turn witch.
ANTIPHOLUS
I will not stay to-night for all the town;
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
